# 6.4.2 Timer Driver

While we're in the subject of interrupts, let's look at an important component
of the board: the Programmable Interval Timer, aka PIT or simply the *timer*.
Timer is critical for *time-sharing multitasking*.

> In modern computers, where the cost of electronics is much less, and the CPU
> and video run at much higher frequencies the PIT lives on as a reminder of
> "the good ole' days". […] On an x86 system, there are two to four timers
> available: the PIT, the RTC [Real-Time Clock in the CMOS], the TSC, or the
> local APIC (older systems may not have a TSC or an APIC). [^osdev]

Note linux-0.10 was using the CMOS RTC. Although modern systems use APIC, we'll
use the PIT as a starting point for our system timer.

> The programmable interval timer (PIT, 8253 chip) is a standard timer device
> consisting of an oscillator running at base frequency 1.193182 MHz. Provided
> different frequency dividers ranging from 0-65535, it can produce a timer
> frequency of the base frequency divided by the frequency divider. The PIT is
> wired to IRQ0. [^hux-kernel]

First the PIT has basically 4 communication ports:

| I/O Port | Description          |
|----------|----------------------|
|  0x40    | Channel 0 data Port  |
|  0x41    | Channel 1 data Port  |
|  0x42    | Channel 2 data Port  |
|  0x43    | Mode/Command register|

Channel 0 is connected to the PIC chip and generates IRQ0. Channel 1 was once
to refresh the capacitor of the RAM, but is practically unused anymore. Channel
2 is connected to the PC speaker.

To configure the PIT, we send a single byte to the command port in the
following format:

| Bits  | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|-------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 6 - 7 | Channel. We use channel 0 (00).                                                                                                                                                                               |
| 4 - 5 | Access mode. Since the data port is 8 bit but the data may be 16 bit, we need specify how to read/write the data: lobyte only, hibyte only, lobyte/hibyte, latch count XXXX. We use Low first then high (11). |
| 1 - 3 | Operating mode. We use mode 3 "square wave generator" (011).                                                                                                                                                  |
| 0     | BCD/Binary. We Binary mode (0).                                                                                                                                                                               |

We won't explain all modes, but these modes differ in: when counting starts,
how count reaching zero is signaled on the output, if the counters are
automatically reset, etc. Typical OSes and BIOSes use mode 3 "square wave
generator", sometimes mode 2 "rate generator" if higher rates are needed.

The configuration code is rather straightforward. We send the configuration
byte 00110110b/0x36 on the command port and then send the "frequency divider"
on the data data for channel 0. The divider is defined as:

```
divisor = FREQ_BASE / desired freq  # FREQ_BASE = 1193182 Hz
```

The divider can be thought of as the number of clock ticks to count until
sending an IRQ. When we apply the divider to the base frequency (i.e. FREQ_BASE
/ divisor), we get the desired frequency.

For now we just print a dot on the screen on each tick and keep track of ticks
in a volatile variable for later usage. We can think of implementing a
`sleep()` or a stopwatch timer.

A note on `volatile`:

> The volatile keyword is intended to prevent the compiler from applying any
> optimizations on objects that can change in ways that cannot be determined by
> the compiler. […]  The system always reads the current value of a volatile
> object from the memory location rather than keeping its value in temporary
> register at the point it is requested, even if a previous instruction asked
> for a value from the same object. [^geekgeek]



## References

- [^hux-kernel]: [hux-kernel](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel/wiki/08.-External-Device-Support#programmable-interval-timer-pit)
- [^osdev]: [osdev](https://wiki.osdev.org/Programmable_Interval_Timer)
- [^geekgeek]: [geekgeek](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/understanding-volatile-qualifier-in-c/)
