# 6.3 Keyboard Driver

Now we can handle interrupts, let's move on to actually handling external
interrupts from the keyboard.

generic 102 key ps/2 keyboard driver.

For historical background about keyboard see the amazing and illustrated
brokenthorn site [^brokenthorn]. We can communicate with the keyboard
communication via 2 chips:

- the *keyboard encoder* inside the keyboard, "usually a form of the original
  Intel 8048, which just so happens to be also Intels first microcontroller"
  [^brokenthorn]. Its role is to scan for key presses or releases, and stores
  them as *scan codes*.
- the *keyboard controller* inside on the motherboard, "usually a form of the
  original 8042 keyboard controller" [^brokenthorn], commands the keyboard via
  the *keyoard protocol*.

The system can communicate with both:

| Encoder    | 0x60 | Read  | Read Input Buffer |
|            | 0x60 | Write | Send Command      |
| Controller | 0x64 | Read  | Status Register   |
|            | 0x64 | Write | Send Command      |

To the encoder we can theoretically send commands to control LEDs, scan code
set, autorepeat. But for now, we will concentrate on reading from it on
IRQ. Same goes for the controller.

There are variety of connectivity interfaces with keynoards AT/XT, PS/2, USB
being some of them. USB connectivity is regarded as complex.

> When a key is pressed, released, or held down, a *scan code* is sent to the
> computers onboard keyboard controller. There are two types of scan codes:
> *Make Codes* and *Break Codes*. A *Make Code* is sent when a key is pressed
> or held down while a *break code* is sent when a key is released. There is a
> unique make code and break code for each key on the keyboard. The entire set
> of numbers that represent all of the scan codes make up the keyboard *scan
> code set*. [^brokenthorn]

> The original IBM-PC keyboards (using the old XT interface) used "scan code set
> 1". The new AT keyboards generated different scan codes, or "scan code set
> 2". [^osdev]

For compatibility reasons, keyboards usually support at least set 2 but default
to translate set 2 into set 1.

For USB keyboards, and for compatibility reasons as well, the mainboard
emulates USB Keyboards and Mice as PS/2 devices. This is called *USB Legacy
Support*.

Scan codes themselves are sequences of one or more bytes. All keys generae scan
codes, including modifier keys like Shift, Alt, Ctrl. If we want to store some
key event for 'A' or "Shift-a", we need some state to remember that Shift is
down when A is pressed. This translating from scan codes to key events are
usually referred as "mapping to key codes" or "mapping to key events". There's
no standard for this translation. The implementation will depend on how we
intend to use key events afterwards. Some applications, like a display server
or a window manager, might be interested to know everything about the key
event: was it a key press or release, what modifiers were in effect, etc. Other
application, like the system console or a shell, might only be interested by
the ascii character or sequence of characters produced. For flexibility and
clarity we adopted a two-fold translation process:
1. scan code → key code + modifiers, i.e. what key was used. Ex: on a XT US
   keyboard, scancode E0 B6 is `KEY_RSHIFT` released.
2. key code + modifiers → ascii string. For now we'll only handle the Shift
   modifier. Ex: Shift+`KEY_5` will produce the single character sequence
   `%`.

```
TODO code
```

To keep it simple for now, we won't handle leds on the keyboard.

Later we will store key events into a circular buffer to be consumed by other
applications. But for now we'll just print to the screen on "make" codes.

```
TODO code
```

Interestingly enough, the linux-0.01 interrupt handler `kernel/keyboard.s` is
all in assembly code!


## References

- [^brokenthorn]: [brokenthorn](http://www.brokenthorn.com/Resources/OSDev19.html)
- [^osdev]: [osdev](https://wiki.osdev.org/)
