# 7.1 Interlude: Building and Utilities

## Building

[Osdev-Notes][^osdev-notes] have a couple of important and fascinating notes
about building our project. Among these is the explanation of using `CFLAGS +=
-ffreestanding`: We are writing an operating system, not a userspace program
that's expected to run on a host operating system. Our kernel won't assume any
dependencies nor any environment (`argc` or `envp`).

This is also why we're using a linker script, to control the shape of our
binary.

Refer to [Osdev-Notes][^osdev-notes] for the specifics of compiler options.

## Printf

For debugging and treaceability we want to be able to log and print values,
like integers, pointers, strings or characters. The usual solution is
`printf`. A full-fledged `printf` that supports many formats is complex. So
we'll go for a simple implementation borrowed from
[xv6](https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-public/blob/master/console.c#L55). Some
implmentations prefer to distinguish between the actual formating (`sprintf`)
and actually printing to the screen.

The code for xv6's `cprintf` is rather straightforward. Interestingly the
implementation doesn't use `va_list` from `<stdarg.h>` but directly fetches the
function's arguments from the stack.

Consumers must pay special attention to the size of arguments when using
`cprintf`: `%x` for a `uint64_t` argument is only going to fetch the first
`uint32_t` half! So we added a `%l` format which is a shortcut for what should
be `%ul`.

## Stack trace

We can generate stack trace by unpiling function calls, from the current
function to the beginning of the stack, by leveraging the calling convention,
*cdecl* in our case. Remember how a function call happens:

1. the caller pushes arguments to the stack in reverse order
2. the caller calls the function, usually using the `call` instruction. `call`
   pushes `eip` to the stack, so the callee can later return, and jumps to the
   address of the function.
3. the callee saves `ebp` by pushing it to the stack and sets it with `esp`.

So, inside the callee, without the stack looks like this

```
|------|-----------|--------|
| low  |           |        |
|      |           |        |
|      | local1    | <- esp |
|      | saved epb | <- ebp |
|      | saved eip |        |
|      | param1    |        |
|      | param2    |        |
|      |           |        |
| high |           |        |
|------|-----------|--------|
```

So by design the callee is able to read its return address (saved `eip`), which
points to the caller's code section.

We don't have yet the exact address of the (beginning of the) caller function
though. To know that, and utlimately resolve the symbol name, we would use the
ELF symbol table. A bootloader like GRUB would provide us with a pointer to
this table. For each stack frame, We would traverse the symbol table, find the
code section which contains the saved `eip`.

We won't reach that point though as we won't be using any bootloader for
now. See the details of [the lookup function in
hux](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel/blob/main/src/common/debug.c#L34).
We can manually approximate that lookup though using the link map provided in
`kernel.map` by `ld -M`, which includes the symbol table.

Note the stop condition for traversing the call chain: we initialize ebp to zero.


## Debug boot sector in bochs

Bochs stop before booting the machine and we're given the opportunity to to
debug our bootloader.

```
lb 0x7c00       # break point at linear address
p               # proceed; next; step-over
c               # continue
x /40hx 0x7c00  # inspect memory
print-stack     # inspect stack
```

## Detecting physical memory

In this chapter, we intend to add managing memory using virtual memory. We'll
implement an allocator for physical pages and enable paging. But the first step
will be to determine the memory that's available to our kernl. We need a proper
physical memory map.

Again a bootloader like GRUB would come handy, as it woud provide us with such
a memory map. Actually we'll just implement memory detection ourselves,
leveraging a BIOS interrupt: *int 0x15, eax=0xe820*. Actually that's the most
reliable way to detect memory "on all PCs built since 2002, and on most
existing PCs before then" [^osdev]. It's also the first method used by
GRUB. The other ones are:

- BIOS Int 0x15, ax=0xe801 and BIOS Int 0x12
- BIOS Int 0x15, ah=0x88 and BIOS Int 0x12

The e820 call must be done in real mode! We can directly reuse the assembly
code example from Osdev. We'll store the memory map structure into an arbitrary
address (0x8000) and will later pass that address as an argument to our our
kernel. Is this dangerous? We could store it for example into a fixed sized
global variable. But in practice we'll only need that information once to
initialize our physical memory allocator.

As a convention, we'll use a zero entry count in the memory map structure
(`struct pmem_info`) as an anomaly and thus initialize it to zero in our boot
sector before calling the e820 function:

```asm
    mov di, PMEM_ENT
    mov dword [di], 0           ; Initialize memory map.
```

## A20 line

Before the 80286, x86 CPUs had only 20 address lines (A0 through A19). Some
existing programs actually depended on address truncation, the fact that the
maximum address would wrap to a lower one. To ensure compatibility, IBM
disabled the A20 line by default. Furthermore,

> Since the 8042 keyboard controller happened to have a spare pin, that was
> used to control the AND gate that disables this address bit [A20]. [^aeb]

Fascinating historical background can be found in [an osdev forum
post](https://forum.osdev.org/viewtopic.php?p=281278#p281278), noticeably

> The assumption was that there weren't going to be future 8086 models,
> something which Intel had basically assured both IBM and Microsoft would be
> the case.

Detecting and enabling A20 is typically the job of the bootloader, as some of
the techniques require real mode. Exhaustively detecting and enabling A20 is a
somewhat involved endeavor [^osdev][^aeb]. A modern OS targetting modern PCs
should probably support primarily EFI boot anyways which enables A20.

So what are the implications for our hobby OS? It depends on the level of
support we'd like to provide. We'll probably only test and play on emulators.
Bochs or qemu do enable A20 at boot. Virtualbox doesn't. All this is
interesting to test A20-related code: we can disable/enable A20 on bochs and
virtualbox, for example with BIOS Int 0x15 ax=0x2400, but it's [near to
impossible on qemu](https://github.com/margaretbloom/disable-a20).

Also our bootloader is almost 512B at this point and adding decent A20 handling
would require us to switch to a 2-stage bootloader. It thus seems reasonable to

1. attempt to enable A20 with the recommended BIOS Int 0x15, ax=0x2401 method
2. add a safeguard in the kernel when initializing physical memory management:
   write different values to 2 addresses which would be the same without A20
   enabled, such as 0x012345 and 0x112345, then compare their content.


## References

- [^osdev-notes]: [osdev-notes](https://github.com/dreamos82/Osdev-Notes/blob/master/01_Build_Process/02_Overview.md
- [^osdev]: [osdev](https://wiki.osdev.org/A20)
- [^aeb]: [aeb](https://www.win.tue.nl/~aeb/linux/kbd/A20.html)
- Other precious debugging techniques in [hux-kernel](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel.wiki/blob/master/05.-Debugging-%26-Testing.md)
