# 7.3 Virtual Memory

Our goal for this part is just to enable paging. That is switching on the
related CPU functionality. Not more. We will exploit that mechanism later when
we implement processes. Let's dive in.

## Address translation

> Many platforms, including x86, use a memory management unit (MMU) to handle
> translation between the virtual and physical address spaces. [^osdev]

**TLB** (Translation Lookaside Buffer) caches page lookups.

> For simplicity, our paging system will only support **pages** of size 4KiB,
> and the physical memory is divided into **frames** of size
> 4KiB. [^hux-kernel]

On x86 the translation from virtual to physical addresses is done via:

- a special register, CR3 aka Page Directory Base Register (PDBR), which stores
  the physical address of the Page Directory
- a special data structure, the Page Directory, a table of 1024 32-bit
  entries (for 4K pages) pointing to Page Tables
- other very similar data structure, Page Tables, tables of 1024 32-bit
  entries (for 4K pages) poimting to actual physical frames.

2 important notes on the translation:

1. Translation is a 2-level lookup using the virtual address as follows:
   ```
   32-bit VADDR := |31  PDE Index  22|21  PTE Index  12|11  Offset In Page  0|
   ```
2. Page Directory and Page Table *entries* are 32-bit and can be considered as
   physical addresses to Page Tables or frames respectively, except that only
   the 20 MSBs are used (as LSBs are used as flags). Meaning that addresses
   must be (4K) page-aligned.

Note how easy we can change the whole memory context! For example for different
processes. That said when modifying translation tables, we need to remove
obsolete entries from the TLB. This can be done by either:

- Issuing the `invlpg` instruction to invalidate a page
- Reloading the `CR3` register to simulate a complete address space switch

## Setup paging

Paging is actually enabled by setting bit 31 of CR0. As soon as paging is
enabled, all addresses (used in code thus by the CPU) become virtual, and all
of our memory refrences go through the MMU first!

> Our goal after setting up paging is to have the kernel’s virtual address
> space **identity-mapped** to the beginning of the physical memory and reserve
> some fixed amount of memory for the kernel heap. The rest of the physical
> memory will be free frames for mapping user process pages. [^hux-kernel]

> Identity Mapping is nothing more then mapping a virtual address to the same
> physical address. For example, virtual address 0x100000 is mapped to physical
> address 0x100000. Yep--Thats all there is to it. The only real time this is
> required is when first setting up paging. It helps insure the memory
> addresses of your current running code of where they are at stays the same
> when paging is enabled. Not doing this will result in immediate triple
> fault. You will see an example of this in our Virtual Memory Manager
> initialization routine. [^brokenthorn]

Identity-mapping the kernel is convenient as we enable pagination: the physical
addresses before are mapped to linear addresses afterwards.

Identity-mapping the kernel makes address translation for the kernel heap much
faster [???Really???Why]

Quick question: if physical address space is 2^32 = 4 GiB, and paging deals
with a virtual space of 1024 (page directory entries) * 1024 (page table
entries = frames) * 4096 (page size) = 4 GiB, **how precisely does paging
provide a wider virtual address space**? Well for one *each process* can
virtually access 4 GiB. Also the address space can be extended to disk pages,
aka **swapping**.

## Higher half kernel

What are higher half kernels?

> How can we allow multiple programs a 4GB address space if we can only have
> one page directory at a time?  We cant. Not nativly, anyways. Alot of
> mutitasking operating systems map the high 2 GB address space for its own use
> as "kernel space" and the low 2 GB as "user space". The user space cannot
> touch kernel space. With the kernel address space being mapped to every
> processes 4GB virtual address space, we can simply switch the current page
> directory without error using the kernel no matter what process is currently
> running. This is possible due to the kernel always being located at the same
> place in the processes address space. This also makes scheduling
> possible. [^brokenthorn]

Why higher half kernels?

> We can very well run our kernel at some lower virtual address. One reason has
> to do with v86 tasks. If you want to support v86 tasks, v86 tasks can only
> run in user mode and within the real mode address limits (0xffff:0xffff), or
> about 1MB+64k linear address. It is also typical to run user mode programs in
> the first 2GB (or 3GB on some OSs) as software typically never has a need to
> access high memory locations. [^brokenthorn]

This is just for reference as we won't be using this for now. All we want to do
for now is enabling paging. To setup a higher half kernel, see:

- https://wiki.osdev.org/Higher_Half_x86_Bare_Bones
- https://github.com/dreamos82/Osdev-Notes/blob/master/HigherHalf.md


## References

- [^sos]: [sos](sos.enix.org/)
- [^hux-kernel]: [hux-kernel](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel)
- [^nullprog]: We're very greatful to Chris Wellons for his amazing blog post
  on [How to build DOS COM files with
  GCC](https://nullprogram.com/blog/2014/12/09/) which made it explicit that we
  need to use the *address* of the linker variable!
- [^brokenthorn]: [brokenthorn](http://www.brokenthorn.com/Resources/OSDev18.html)
