# 7.4 Heap Allocator

To complete our memory management, we need a proper heap allocator, also
capable of freeing, that will thus provide `kalloc()` and `kfree()` to other
parts of the kernel, for example for page tables, process user memory, kernel
stacks.

Our current allocator (`kalloc_temp()`) is only useful during the boot process
to allocate long-lived kernel structures. Also the kernel allocator is not to
be confused with the frame allocator (`frame_alloc()`), which only tracks
allocated frames.

Typical implementations of heap allocators include a bitmaps or linked
lists. We'll follow Hux [^hux-kernel] and xv6 [^xv6] and use a linked list for
free blocks, aka **free list**.

## The Hux implementation

While super instructive, Hux's approach is a bit be misleading since it:

1. starts by implementing a basic kernel heap allocator together with a frame
   allocator [FIXME isn't this the same thing???],
2. then introduces a more sophisticated variable-size allocator in [Heap Memory
   Allocator](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel/wiki/11.-Heap-Memory-Allocator#main-references-of-this-chapter)
3. finally introduces yet another allocator for [fixed-size
   allocation](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel/wiki/12.-Aligned-SLAB-Allocators),
   aka *Aligned Slab Allocators*.

The intent may have been educational and maybe in practice the slab allocator
implementation should replace the basic one?

The reference to OSTEP chapter 17 *Free-Space Management* in Hux's *Heap Memory
Allocator* chapter is misleading because the OSTEP chapter really is about
variable-size allocation:

> Where free-space management becomes more difficult (and interesting) is when
> the free space you are managing consists of variable-sized units; this arises
> a user-level memory-allocation library (as in malloc() and free()) and in an
> OS managing physical memory when using segmentation to implement virtual
> memory. [^ostep]

The variable-size allocator is only used in the file system. The fixed-size
allocator is the one actually used in paging and process management (look for
salloc_page()).

In summary, hux-kernel uses multiple physical allocators, with different memory
spaces, either at different time or for different purposes.

## The xv6 allocator

Xv6 has a single allocator implementation for its kernel physical memory (see
`kalloc.c`), albeit with 2 variants, as the kernel heap is also initialized in
2 steps. `kinit1()` initializes 4 MB needed for paging (page directory and
tables). `kinit2()` is used after paging to initialize the rest of the physical
memory. Another reason for having two calls is that locking is not available in the
beginning and until all processors are started.

The xv6 book further explains in the chapter *Physical memory allocation*, that
even for fixed-sized blocks, the question of where to store the free list
arises. For maximum flexibility, as the number of nodes may not be fixed, OSes
often chose to embed the list in the blocks themselves:

> [xv6] keeps track of which pages are free by threading a linked list through
> the pages themselves. [^xv6]

Initialization of the list consists of *freeing* the memory range,
i.e. *adding* pages to the list. Each free block starts with a header:

```C
struct run {
  struct run *next; // points to the next free block
};
```

Note allocated blocks don't include the header: kalloc() returns a pointer to
the beginning of the page!

Interestingly, the memory is not allocated in ascending order. The way the
linked list is implemented and the way we create the freelist (by *freeing*
address ranges), initially, the list points at and starts with the highest
numbered free frame. The `next` frame actually points to the previous one.

For a variable-sized allocator (like `malloc()`), each block contains an
additional `size` field in its header. Example:

```C
typedef struct __node_t {
    int size;
    struct __node_t *next; // Could store a magic to check for memory overrides
} node_t;
```

And yes, in this case, the allocator must account for the header size during
allocation.

Some implementations like sos [^sos] keep track of allocated blocks as well.
Linux-0.01 has a rudimentary allocator (`mm/memory.c`, an `unsigned short`
array) only for paging pages.


## Implementation

Let's use xv6 approach and implementation. We will initialize the allocator
early to allow for paging and complete the process later. We thus have to
revisit our previous approach and replace our previous frame allocator
implementations (`kheap_curr` and the bitmap frame allocator).

Related to the previous topic of the relation (or confusion) between page
mapping and heap allocation, note that the page mapping itself does allocate
frames for its own use: the page tables. This is not to be confused by the
creation of the freelist by the heap allocator. I.e. `kinit()` *creates*
allocatable space, while `mappages()` *consumes* that space for the page
tables.


## References

- [^hux-kernel]: [hux-kernel](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel.wiki/blob/master/11.-Heap-Memory-Allocator.md)
- [^xv6]: [xv6](https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-public)
- [^ostep]: [OSTEP](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/vm-freespace.pdf)
- [^sos]: [sos](sos.enix.org/)
- [^linux]: [linux-0.01](https://mirrors.edge.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/Historic/old-versions/RELNOTES-0.01)
