# 7.5 Higher half kernel

What are higher half kernels?

> A higher half kernel is a kernel that is mapped to the higher half of the
> virtual address space, despite being loaded to the lower half of the physical
> address space. [^osdev-higherhalf]

How do we do that? In short we:

1. tell the linker to load the kernel to a higher address
   (`. = 0x80100000;`). What that means in practice for the kernel in binary
   format is that all addresses will be offset.
2. make sure paging is enabled before jumping to the kernel's `main()`, i.e. in
   the bootloader.

Why higher half kernels?

The main reason is to avoid collision: user mode processes are linked by
default to be loaded into the memory position 0x00000000. But if the kernel is
mapped onto there already, user processes need to be linked with a linker
script to load to a different starting address, which is a very cumbersome
solution for the users of the operating system. [^littleos]

While Windows or Linux are higher half kernels, some minimal or hobby OSes like
[hux-kernel](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel/blob/d9e210f3f90b030dc2cf2df6a19484c78c50fed1/Makefile#L39)
or
[sos](https://git.mathux.org/mathieu/sos-code-article10/src/commit/71086d95667a08f65503a12bee5e68166540affb/userland/ldscript.lds)
prefer to keep things simple and identity map all memory.

Another reason sometimes invoked are v86 tasks. V86 tasks form a "virtual
machine" to execute an 8086 program [^brokenthorn].


## Implementation

**Note**: this iteration is captured in the git tag `higher-half`.

Since we want to have our kernel mapped to a higher region of the
*virtual* memory, some necessary conditions are:

1. paging must be enabled,
2. the kernel must be linked to start at some higher virtual address.

The immediate consequence is that paging must be enabled before we reach our
kernel's `main()`.

To prepare for paging, xv6 initially uses a temporary page directory
(`entrypgdir`) which it defines with 4 MB pages, aka *super pages*, for
simplicity and only maps the first 4 MB of physical memory:

> Xv6 uses super pages in one place: the initial page table (1306). The array
> initialization sets two of the 1024 PDEs, at indices zero and 512
> (`KERNBASE>>PDXSHIFT`), leaving the other PDEs zero. Xv6 sets the `PTE_PS`
> bit in these two PDEs to mark them as super pages. The kernel also tells the
> paging hardware to allow super pages by setting the `CR_PSE` bit (Page Size
> Extension) in `%cr4`. [^xv6-book]

Page Size Extension (PSE) doesn't use a two-level page translation scheme:
instead of a PDE pointing to a PTE, it directly points to a 4 MiB page (22-bit
address space). The page directory acts as a page table.

This temporary page directory is later reused to start the other processors,
which we don't intend to do.

PSE can remain enabled afterwards: xv6 later simply never marks any page with
`PTE_PS` again.

We do all this in `kernel_entry.asm` as it's probably the responsibility of the
kernel rather than the bootloader. Notice how easy it is to setup basic paging
once in protected mode: the definition of `entrypgdir` is pretty
straightforward (2 entries) and the switch is actually less than 10
lines of code! With paging enabled right before the kernel main start, we need
to jump to the new *virtual* address of the kernel code, which we do using a
**register-indirect absolute jump** using the EAX register:

```asm
    mov eax, main
    call eax  ; Absolute Jump.
```

Using a direct absolute jump (`jmp main`) would result in a jump to the lower
physical address of the kernel's `main()` and our kernel code would continue
running in lower space. This would eventually break (triple faults ahead…), for
example when we remove the low mappings, as we're designing everything to run
in higher space.

From [xv6's code](https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-public/blob/eeb7b415dbcb12cc362d0783e41c3d1f44066b17/entry.S#L61):

```C
  # Jump to main(), and switch to executing at
  # high addresses. The indirect call is needed because
  # the assembler produces a PC-relative instruction
  # for a direct jump.
```

But that's not quite sufficient and there are actually other
implications. Things that we should probably do even if not running in higher
half. Our kernel is still using some of the structures defined in the
bootloader, namely: the stack and the GDT. 😱

### Stack

Let's define a 16K area in `kernel_entry.asm`, in the kernel .bss section, for
our stack. We'll also make sure to update the stack pointer ESP to point at the
end of our new stack.

One interesting question: now that our stack has a fixed allocated memory
space, now that we updated ESP to point to its top, how do we ensure it doesn't
**overflow**, i.e. ESP doesn't end up pointing to an address before the begin
of the stack (since the stack grows downwards)?

> The stack is easy to use, but it has one problem. There is no "end," so it is
> vulnerable to a variation of the buffer overflow attack. The attacker pushes
> more elements than the stack is able to contain, so elements are pushed
> outside the stack memory, overwriting code, which the attacker can then
> execute. [^osdev-stacksec]

There doesn't seem to be an easy answer to that. Some sources suggest to use an
extra GDT segment for the stack[^osdev-stacksec],
[others](https://forum.osdev.org/viewtopic.php?p=316567&sid=7a9e20a40ba30741df0195b9a38a0d77#p316567)
point to [Task
Gates](https://wiki.osdev.org/Interrupt_Descriptor_Table#Task_Gate). But the
OSDev wiki also mentions that

> This type of gate is not often used as hardware task switching is slow and
> has little to no optimization on modern processors. As well, it has been
> entirely removed on x86-64.

See also
[Stack-Segment Fault](https://wiki.osdev.org/Exceptions#Stack-Segment_Fault). So
we'll just hope for the best for now and skip checking the bounds of kernel's
stack. 🙈

By the way our kernel data has grown to the point that the whole kernel doesn't
fit into our 40 512-bytes sectors limit. So let's increase the limit to the
maximum: 50 sectors. 50 sectors allows for the end of our kernel to reach
address 0x7400 (0x1000+(512*50)), which is still before the bootloader's code
beginning (0x7c00).

Next time, we'll definitely have to modify the bootloader to copy our kernel
chunk by chunk to a higher memory area.

### GDT

Do we need to reload the GDT? Reminder: the GDT resides in memory at a location
pointed by the GDTR register. So yes, we now need GDTR to point to a virtual
address. The initial GDT was created in the bootloader, in lower memory. We
could maybe pass its virtual address as an argument to the kernel main, as
we're doing with the memory map, but let's play safe and have our kernel remain
autonomous from the bootloader and have its own GDT.

Additionally, when reloading the GDT, we also reload the segment registers
(`mov ds, ax` and so on). This is why it's easier to do in assembly
(`gdt_load.asm`). Xv6 doesn't do it. Osdev advises to do it, and hux also does
it.

> Whatever you do with the GDT has no effect on the CPU until you load new
> Segment Selectors into Segment Registers. For most of these registers, the
> process is as simple as using MOV instructions, but changing the CS register
> requires code resembling a jump or call to elsewhere, as this is the only way
> its value is meant to be changed. [^osdev-gdt]

Let's zoom into the C definition of segment descriptors (ultimately 64-bit
values). In xv6 they look like this:

```C
// Segment Descriptor
struct segdesc {
  uint lim_15_0 : 16;  // Low bits of segment limit
  uint base_15_0 : 16; // Low bits of segment base address
  uint base_23_16 : 8; // Middle bits of segment base address
  uint type : 4;       // Segment type (see STS_ constants)
  uint s : 1;          // 0 = system, 1 = application
  uint dpl : 2;        // Descriptor Privilege Level
  uint p : 1;          // Present
  uint lim_19_16 : 4;  // High bits of segment limit
  uint avl : 1;        // Unused (available for software use)
  uint rsv1 : 1;       // Reserved
  uint db : 1;         // 0 = 16-bit segment, 1 = 32-bit segment
  uint g : 1;          // Granularity: limit scaled by 4K when set
  uint base_31_24 : 8; // High bits of segment base address
};
```

The structure is initialized via a macro:

```C
#define SEG(type, base, lim, dpl) (struct segdesc) {                \
    ((lim) >> 12) & 0xffff,                                         \
    (uint32_t)(base) & 0xffff,                                      \
    ((uint32_t)(base) >> 16) & 0xff, type, 1/*application*/, dpl, 1/*present*/, \
    (uint32_t)(lim) >> 28, 0/*unused*/, 0/*reserved*/, 1/*32-bit*/, 1/*granularity=4K*/, \
    (uint32_t)(base) >> 24 }
```

The struct definition is very detailed, which is nice for learning, but the
resulting assembly code is pretty convoluted, with a lot of `mov`s to set each
field. Arguably more straightforward definition could look like:

```C
struct segdesc {
    uint16_t limit_lo;
    uint16_t base_lo;
    uint8_t base_mi;
    uint8_t access;
    uint8_t flags;
    uint8_t base_hi;
} __attribute__((packed)); // `packed` is not strictly necessary since the
                           // struct is already 32-bit aligned.
```

While slightly better with regards to the simplicity of the resulting assembly
code for the initialization function, a compiler optimization like `-O2` will
anyways inline the initialization functions and compute the values directly.

But there is more! We decided to use a GDTR-like structure to pass to the
`lgdt` call:

```C
struct gdtr {
  uint16_t limit;
  uint32_t base;
} __attribute__((packed));  // <=== `packed` ESSENTIAL HERE!!!
```

Without `packed`, the `gdtr` structure gets stretched over 2× 32-bit
words. I.e. `gdtr.limit` is 0x30, and `gdtr.base` is 0x84408010 (wrong!):

```
0xffffffff801083f8:     0x80100030      0x80108440      …
```

Mind the endianness in the dump! This results in yet another triple fault, this
time a `(13)` [General Protection
Fault](https://wiki.osdev.org/Exceptions#General_Protection_Fault).

With the `packed` attribute, `gdtr.base` does point at the right `gdt` address
(0x80108440 in this case):

```
0xffffffff801083fa:     0x84400030      0x1cd28010      …
```

Xv6 takes the wise approach of using a temporary array of 16-bit elements
(`uint16_t pd[3]`) which it initializes element by element.

### Triple faults

One bit. One flag can mess up your whole paging setup.

Pay extra attention to your page mapping, especially the permission flags on PDEs and PTEs.

We made the mistake of misinterpreting a comment in a xv6 code comment: we
omitted the `PTE_W` (writable) flag on PDEs as we understood it would be
overridden by the permissions on the PTEs. Wrong! …and days gone into debugging
😭. `PTE_W` is especially needed for the region where the kernel stack is going
to live!

This mistake led to triple fault exceptions — as many memory mapping errors
do[^osdev-triplefault]. It's worth taking a moment to understand bochs' output
in such cases:

```
00410408611i[CPU0  ] CPU is in protected mode (active)
00410408611i[CPU0  ] CS.mode = 32 bit
00410408611i[CPU0  ] SS.mode = 32 bit
00410408611i[CPU0  ] EFER   = 0x00000000
00410408611i[CPU0  ] | EAX=003ff000  EBX=8010843c  ECX=00000000  EDX=80101fb5
00410408611i[CPU0  ] | ESP=80108404  EBP=80108428  ESI=000e7f57  EDI=0000a094
00410408611i[CPU0  ] | IOPL=0 id vip vif ac vm RF nt of df IF tf SF zf AF pf cf
00410408611i[CPU0  ] | SEG sltr(index|ti|rpl)     base    limit G D
00410408611i[CPU0  ] |  CS:0008( 0001| 0|  0) 00000000 ffffffff 1 1
00410408611i[CPU0  ] |  DS:0010( 0002| 0|  0) 00000000 ffffffff 1 1
00410408611i[CPU0  ] |  SS:0010( 0002| 0|  0) 00000000 ffffffff 1 1
00410408611i[CPU0  ] |  ES:0010( 0002| 0|  0) 00000000 ffffffff 1 1
00410408611i[CPU0  ] |  FS:0010( 0002| 0|  0) 00000000 ffffffff 1 1
00410408611i[CPU0  ] |  GS:0010( 0002| 0|  0) 00000000 ffffffff 1 1
00410408611i[CPU0  ] | EIP=80100969 (80100969)
00410408611i[CPU0  ] | CR0=0xe0010011 CR2=0x80108400
00410408611i[CPU0  ] | CR3=0x003ff000 CR4=0x00000010
(0).[410408611] [0x000000100969] 0008:0000000080100969 (unk. ctxt): push 0x80101e1a           ; 681a1e1080
00410408611e[CPU0  ] exception(): 3rd (14) exception with no resolution, shutdown status is 00h, resetting
00410408611i[SYS   ] bx_pc_system_c::Reset(HARDWARE) called
00410408611i[CPU0  ] cpu hardware reset
```

Pay attention to this line:

```
00410408611e[CPU0  ] exception(): 3rd (14) exception with no resolution, shutdown status is 00h, resetting
```

This means we encountered a triple fault (`3rd exception with no resolution`),
and this exception is **`(14)`**, i.e. a page fault.

### Debugging

Debugging these triple faults led us to finally employ gdb with qemu, as qemu
provides a gdb remote interface, along with bochs debugging facilities.

#### Gdb remote / Qemu

We now compile the kernel to an intermediary ELF file: we first compile the
kernel to ELF and then use `objcopy` to strip it to a flat binary. This enabled
us to reference things from the C part in the assembly part. At least with
NASM, cross-referencing seems impossible with a flat binary.

Note that's the approach taken by xv6 for its initial GDT `entrypgdir`. We
ended up keeping the initial GDT in assembly (`kernel/kernel_entry.asm`) so
everything is in one place.

After adding debug options (`gcc -g`) to the compilation, we added a couple of
convenient debugging targets to our Makefile: start qemu with a gdbserver on
one side, start gdb with a specific `.gdbinit` to connect to qemu on the other
side.


#### Bochs

Bochs also offer basic debugging capabilities (dump registers or memory
regions). A break point has to be set inside the code with:

```C
    __asm__ __volatile__("xchg %bx, %bx"); // Bochs magic break
```

## References

- [^osdev-higherhalf]:
  [osdev](https://wiki.osdev.org/Higher_Half_x86_Bare_Bones)
- [^xv6-book]: [xv6-book](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2018/xv6/book-rev11.pdf)
- [^brokenthorn]: [brokenthorn](http://www.brokenthorn.com/Resources/OSDev18.html)
- [^osdev-gdt]: [osdev-gdt](https://wiki.osdev.org/GDT_Tutorial#Reload_Segment_Registers)
- [^osdev-stacksec]: [osdev-gdt](https://wiki.osdev.org/Stack#Security)
- [^osdev-triplefault]: see https://wiki.osdev.org/Exceptions#Page_Fault,
  https://wiki.osdev.org/Triple_Fault,
  https://wiki.osdev.org/Paging#Page_Faults
- [^osdev-notes]: [osdev-notes](https://github.com/dreamos82/Osdev-Notes/blob/4df659bb8a6680b9d93b11d06d7d5ea4a567e8ec/HigherHalf.md)
