# 8.2 Interlude — Serial console

**Note**: this iteration is captured in the git tag `serial-console`.

Processes are hard. Although on the edge of starting our first user process, we
fancy taking a small detour around new hardware and more comfy debugging.

Indeed, while debugging, we sometime find ourselves with a lot of useful screen
output that disappears on scrolling. To remedy that issue we could handle
scrolling back, but that sounds complicated and probably involves some circular
buffer ("back buffer") and fancy display handling. Maybe we can do that later.

Another funny approach is to use the host's terminal scroll back capabilities.
Indeed with `qemu -nographic` we can

> totally disable graphical output so that QEMU is a simple command line
> application. The emulated serial port is redirected on the console and muxed
> with the monitor. (man 1 qemu)

What that means is that the guest won't see any vga display. Instead output to
the serial port (COM1) will go to the host terminal.

Note many installations, including headless systems, still use the serial
consoles for debugging.

Also bochs' snapshot feature only captures what's visible.

## Serial ports

> The original IBM PC computer came with two communication ports: a parallel
> port for connection to a printer, and a serial port to connect to a modem for
> external communications. Of course, over time those ports were used for other
> purposes, but that was their original intended usage.
>
> But by far the most common usage is for an RS-232 port with a 9-pin
> D-connector (DE-9) for asynchronous communications (see Communications).
> (https://wiki.osdev.org/Serial_Port)

> Serial ports are typically controlled by UART hardware [aka *serial
> controller*]. This is the hardware chip responsible for encoding and decoding
> the data sent over the serial interface.
>
> Use of serial ports for connecting peripherals has largely been deprecated in
> favor of USB. (https://wiki.osdev.org/Serial_Ports)

So we can use UART to write to the serial port. Note this can be done via
*INT14h* which would come handy in bootloader.

> A universal asynchronous receiver-transmitter (UART) is a hardware device for
> asynchronous serial communication […]. (https://wiki.osdev.org/UART)

> The [UART chip] implements the serial port interface for IBM PC compatible
> personal computers, where it is commonly connected to an RS-232 port.
> The implementation in x86/64 is known as the COM interface, which is
> accessible via standard IO Ports mapped to addresses from 0x3F8 through
> 0x3FF. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/16550_UART)

Implementation examples are available in
[os-dev](https://wiki.osdev.org/Serial_Ports#Example_Code) or
[xv6](https://github.com/mit-pdos/xv6-public/blob/eeb7b415dbcb12cc362d0783e41c3d1f44066b17/uart.c).

## UART Interrupts

We initialize and configure the serial controller to disable buffering (aka
"FIFO") and enable interrupts, which allows for more efficient
communication. We enable the *Received Data Available* interrupt to get
characters from the console (keyboard), see `uartgetc()`. Note xv6-riscv solely
relies on UART for keyboard interaction. We register `IDT_IRQ_COM1` (IRQ-4).

Xv6 has a `trap()` handler for all interrupts, with a big switch statement and
a case for COM1. Similarly we have `isr_handler()` but additionally need to
register a new handler for COM1 explicitly.

For some reason we were unable to get COM1 interrupts to work under qemu or
bochs FIXME. Only when following xv6 which supports multiple CPUs (SMP) and
implementing IOAPIC.

## IOAPIC

So the IOAPIC (I/O Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller) is another kind
of PIC for multi-processor systems, but can also be used in a uniprocessor
system.

We're not going to use it right now, as we're not looking to support multiple
CPUs yet, but let's look into it still for our UART experimentation.

> [I/O APIC] used to distribute external interrupts in a more advanced manner
> than that of the standard 8259 PIC. With the I/O APIC, interrupts can be
> distributed to physical or logical (clusters of) processors and can be
> prioritized. Each I/O APIC typically handles 24 external interrupts.
> (https://wiki.osdev.org/IOAPIC)

Programming an I/O APIC is done via:
- two 32-bit control registers: IOREGSEL for register index and IOREGWIN to
  read/write to the selected register.
- many 64-bit registers, one per IRQ.
  - The first three contain general information about the I/O APIC (IOAPICID,
    IOAPICVER, IOAPICARB).
  - Then comes the *Redirection Table*, starting at offset 0x10, with one
    *Entry* per IRQ.

Re-iterating, the I/O APIC really is used to *dispatch* interrupts to CPUs. We
still need to register interrupt handlers!

The default IOAPIC address is 0xFEC00000 but we want to retrieve it from ACPI.

## ACPI

> Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI) is an open standard that
> operating systems can use to discover and configure computer hardware
> components, to perform power management (e.g. putting unused hardware
> components to sleep), auto configuration (e.g. Plug and Play and hot
> swapping), and status monitoring.
>
> Microsoft's Windows 98 was the first operating system to implement ACPI.
> (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACPI)

The way it works is that the OS interacts with it via special I/O-reserved
memory ranges. We will only use it to read system configuration (CPUs, APIC,
etc), which resides in the *RSDT* (Root System Description Table). We must
first detect where the RSDT is by scanning certain memory regions for the
*RSDP* (Root System Description Pointer): 0x40E or 0x000E0000:0x000FFFFF
looking for the string `RSD PTR `.

Note xv6 does something very similar in `mpsearch()`: searching for the *MP
Floating Pointer Structure* (aka *MP Table*) in the EBDA (Extended BIOS Data
Area). MP was superseded by ACPI.

The RSD Table contains pointers to SDTs (*System Description Tables*). The one
we're interested in is the *Multiple APIC Description Table* (MADT). Quick
recap: `RSDP → RSDT → SDTs → MADT`.

## Virtual Memory

One gotcha is we should not forget to map I/O regions.

For ACPI, usually starting around 0x7fe0000, since it's right after kernel
physical memory, but before its virtual beginning (0x80000000), we'll map it to
its virtual equivalent `P2V(acpi)`.

For IOAPIC, since it's after the kernel virtual space, we identity-map it, over
an arbitrary length of 0xf000000 bytes.

Interestingly qemu and bochs do not report the memory region containing IOAPIC
(0xfec00000):

```
# qemu
BIOS-e820: [base=0x0000000007fe0000 length=0x0000000000020000] type=2
BIOS-e820: [base=0x00000000fffc0000 length=0x0000000000040000] type=2

# bochs
BIOS-e820: [base=0x0000000007ff0000 length=0x0000000000010000] type=3
BIOS-e820: [base=0x00000000fffc0000 length=0x0000000000040000] type=2
```

This is a known limitation of [INT 15h, AX=E820h](https://stackoverflow.com/a/60010306):

> Standard PC address ranges will not be reported. Example video memory at
> A0000 to BFFFF physical will not be described by this function.
