# 8.3 Process Scheduling

**Note**: this iteration is captured in the git tag `scheduler`.

Our goal for this chapter is to create the scheduler that will run the init
process we created in the [8.1 Process Creation](doc/8.1.Process_Creation.md)
chapter. We'll still execute in kernel mode and will look into user mode in the
next chapter.

## Context switching

The crux of switching from one thread to another is to replace CPU registers at
the same time, especially ESP and EIP[^mittos64].

Well we only need to replace *some* registers since, according to the calling
convention of [System V ABI](https://wiki.osdev.org/System_V_ABI), when calling
a function, only a few registers are guaranteed to be preserved: edi, esi, ebx,
ebp. eax, ecx, edx are considered scratch registers and are managed by
caller. This is why `struct context` only contains these, plus eip.

So how do we switch registers? Let's step into the `swtch()` assembly function:
`void swtch(struct context **old, struct context *new);`. It

- pushes registers,
- saves the stack pointer (which points to the current stack) to `old`,
- updates esp with the `new` one (which points at the new process's stack)
- pops registers

It's important to note how execution will be altered, i.e. how eip will be
updated. Remember from the *cdecl* calling convention:

1. caller pushes arguments in reverse order onto stack;
   caller pops arguments after return
2. `call` pushes EIP onto the stack and `jmp`'s;
   `ret`  pops saved EIP to EIP

So when entering `swtch()`, eip will be pushed to the stack. So, after we push
the registers, the top of the stack will effectively constitute a `struct
context` structure!

```C
struct context {
    uint32_t edi;
    uint32_t esi;
    uint32_t ebx;
    uint32_t ebp;
    uint32_t eip;
} __attribute__((packed));
```

Inspecting the stack right after entering `swtch(&(c->scheduler), p->context)`:

```
0x801093dc: 0x8010178b saved eip (implicitly from `call <swtch>`)
0x801093e0: 0x80109464 old / &(c->scheduler)
0x801093e4: 0x87fdffec new / p->context
```

Then, right before the switch, having pushed registers:

```
0x801093cc:     0x801093e4      0x87fe0000      0x87fdffec      0x80109428
0x801093dc:     0x8010178b      0x80109464      0x87fdffec      0x80109428
```

Nothing spectacular. Then we save the current esp (0x801093cc) to old, and
switch, setting the new stack pointer.

But what's already on the new stack (0x87fdffec)? Well the new context,
`p->context`, which is all 0, including eip:

```
0x87fdffec:     0x00000000      0x00000000      0x00000000      0x00000000
0x87fdfffc:     0x00000000      0x53434146      0x00000040      0x00000000
```

Interestingly, the page for the new process stack is right at the end of the
kernel heap, that is just before the ACPI I/O space. Here we can recognize the
string "FACS" (Firmware ACPI Control Structure) beginning at 0x7fe0000 🙂

So after we update esp to point to the new process stack, we effectively point
to a `struct context` structure, of which eip is the last field.  Note eip
hasn't changed yet! We're still in `<swtch+16>`. Only when we have popped
registers *from the new stack* will `ret` use the new eip and jump to 0x0
(virtual address of `initcode`).


One question we can already ask ourselves is: how do we switch back? And how do
we switch back to our previous (scheduler) stack? FIXME Let's keep the question
for later.

## Switching to user memory

Before switching contexts we need to switch to the process address space (page
directory) which we prepared earlier when creating the process: update CR3 with
the process page directory.

Lastly, in `initproc_init()`, we set `p->context->eip = 0`, since `initcode`'s
code will reside at virtual address 0x0.

## Scheduler

We now have everything we need to implement a basic scheduler: a round-robin
infinite loop that will basically:

- scan the process table for a `READY` process
- switch to the new process address space (update page directory)
- switch to the new process context (update stack pointer and the program
  counter)

When we run our OS at this point, there's only one `READY` process
(`initcode`), which the scheduler picks up and runs, successfully printing an
"H" on the the second to last VGA line. We only need to be remember to use
virtual addresses in `initcode.asm`.

We ran our first process! That's pretty amazing \\o/ But we're not quite
finished yet. We need to get to userspace, which we'll do in the next chapter.


## References

- [^mittos64]: [mittos64](https://github.com/thomasloven/mittos64/blob/8fac92474adb88a1deca15a34b68b12658dfd5ce/doc/10_Threading.md)
