# 8 Processes

Yeah we're finally getting to processes!

What we'll focus on in this part is understanding what it means to start a user
process, for the kernel, but also at CPU level, as there is hardware support
for that!

Creating new processes is essentially implementing `exec()` (or `fork()`).

There are a lot of topics to cover before we're actually able to spawn a user
process. Tehybel-osdev[^tehybel-osdev] makes roughly the following split:

1. Creating a process: create metadata, load program.
   - Process structures managed by the kernel
     - [hux](/home/foudil/tmp/src/os/hux-kernel/wiki/13.-Abstraction-of-Process.md)
     - [xv6](/home/foudil/tmp/src/os/xv6-annotated/processes.md)
   - Virtual memory for user processes specifically
     - [xv6](/home/foudil/tmp/src/os/xv6-annotated/paging_user.md)
2. Switch context: run the process.

    > During a context switch the kernel restores the saved general-purpose
    > registers using the popal instruction. It also updates cr3 to switch to the
    > new address space. Finally it uses the iret instruction to restore the saved
    > eip, esp, eflags, and cs registers. This transfers execution to user-mode
    > code.

3. System calls: enable programs to hand control back to the kernel, via a *trap*.
4. Scheduler: schedule multiple processes.
   - *Cooperative Scheduling* with Yielding: processes are responsible for the
     switching, which they do by giving up the control of the CPU to another
     process (aka **yield**), via `iret`.
   - *Preemptive Scheduling* with Interrupts: the OS switches processes
     automatically, by setting the PIT to raise an interrupt after a short
     period of time, for example 20 ms.

FIXME review toc for this chapter once complete


### Task State Segment (TSS)

The TSS was briefly mentioned before. What's its role then in process
management?

The short answer is: in x86 (protected mode), TSS serves *hardware task
switching*; but most OSes moved to *software task switching*.

> Since [hardware task switching] proved to be slower than *software task
> switching*, this functionality was removed in long-mode. [^dreamos-int]

Nevertheless TSS must be set up for user mode execution:

> Hux only adopts *software multitasking*, yet it is still required to set up
> one TSS per CPU where system calls might happen, whenever entering user mode
> execution of a process. The CPU automatically uses the information stored in
> this one TSS (SS & ESP register values, essentially) to switch to the
> process's kernel stack upon a boundary cross from user mode into kernel
> mode. [^hux-processes]


## References

- [^xv6-annotated]: [xv6-annotated](https://github.com/palladian1/xv6-annotated/blob/main/spin_locks.md)
- [^OSTEP-locks]: [OSTEP-locks](https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~remzi/OSTEP/threads-locks.pdf)
- [^xv6-book]: [xv6-book](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2018/xv6/book-rev11.pdf)
- [^littleosbook]: [littleosbook](https://littleosbook.github.io/)
- [^hux-processes]: [hux-processes](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel.wiki/blob/b0a30aca0cd301e86ed8d52c498d9294fa1c892c/14.-User-Mode-Execution.md)
- [^tehybel-osdev]: [tehybel-osdev](https://github.com/tehybel/osdev/)
- [^osdev-tss]: [osdev-tss](https://wiki.osdev.org/Task_State_Segment)
- [^dreamos-int]: [^dreamos-int](https://github.com/dreamos82/Osdev-Notes/blob/4df659bb8a6680b9d93b11d06d7d5ea4a567e8ec/05_Userspace/03_Handling_Interrupts.md?plain=1#L12)
