# 9 Storage

Logically, at this point, we're not too far from completing process-related
features. We're mainly missing: process lifecycle syscalls (`fork()`, `wait()`)
and pre-emptive scheduling, especially since we have the timer in place.

But after this long hard work on processes, we can't wait to better understand
persistence and the filesystem in particular. This should also be helpful when we
load `init` from the filesystem, and the shell later. So we can come back to
processes once we either are finished with the filesystem, or have got
sufficient understanding of it.

Following hux we will take a bottom-up approach: start with the IDE hard disk
driver, then gradually build a filesystem upon it.

## The Storage Stack

Storage read/write operations traverse multiple layers, the *storage stack*, to
be translated to device requests.

> A storage stack typically consists of the following layers, from top to bottom ✭[^hux-ide]:
>
> - I/O-related system calls, e.g., `read()`, `write()`, etc.
> - (often) Virtual file system (VFS) layer that provides a unified interface for file systems, e.g., `vfs_open()`, `vfs_read()`, etc.
> - Actual file systems implementations, e.g., Ext2/3/4, XFS, BtrFS, FAT, NTFS, etc.
> - (often) A general block device interface layer
> - Block device drivers for various kinds of storage devices, on various types of connections, and with various types of hardware protocols
> - Physical storage devices, perhaps with in-device controllers


## References

- [^hux-ide]: [hux-ide](https://github.com/josehu07/hux-kernel.wiki/blob/b0a30aca0cd301e86ed8d52c498d9294fa1c892c/18.-IDE-Hard-Disk-Driver.md)
